---
title: Steroids and Osteoporosis
description: What you should know about preventing osteoporosis while on steroid therapy
published: true
date: 2020-07-22T23:10:34.194Z
tags: patient information sheet, steroids, pis
editor: markdown
---

# What is osteoporosis?

Osteoporosis is a common problem in which thinning of the bones results in an increased risk of fractures, typically affecting the hip and spine. It is a well-recognized unwanted effect of steroid therapy, but can be minimised by a bone protection strategy.

# Who is at risk of osteoporosis?

Women are at higher risk of osteoporosis, particularly after menopause due to lower levels of oestrogen. Other risk factors include older age, smoking, low body weight and lack of weight-bearing activity.

# How is bone density measured?

Bone density is assessed by a painless procedure called a bone mineral density (or DEXA) scan. The test is performed in those with a history of fractures, risk factors for osteoporosis or as a baseline measurement before steroids are commenced. Individuals with low bone density are at greater risk of osteoporosis and fractures with steroid therapy. Depending on the result, bone density scans are repeated every 1-2 years to review progress.

# How can steroid-induced osteoporosis be prevented?

The risk of osteoporosis is related to the total steroid dose over time. Using the lowest dose for the shortest period is desirable, although this depends on the nature and severity of the underlying illness. Osteoporosis is much less likely to develop in those receiving a daily dose of prednisone of 7.5mg or less.

Lifestyle strategies to prevent osteoporosis include diet, exercise and quitting smoking.

## Diet

The recommended calcium intake is 1000mg per day or 1200mg per day for postmenopausal women. This can be in the form of calcium in foods or calcium supplements. The main dietary source of calcium is milk and other dairy products. 1 serve of dairy food provides roughly 300mg of calcium. Calcium supplements are recommended if the dietary intake of calcium is not sufficient.

## Exercise

Exercise reduces fracture risk by improving and maintaining bone density. Experts recommend weight-bearing exercise such as walking for at least 30 minutes 3 times per week if you are able.

## Vitamin D

Vitamin D affects bone density and adequate levels reduce bone loss and fracture rates. Vitamin D is generated by the body after exposure to sunlight. Levels can be measured with a blood test and are reduced with low sun exposure or in dark-skinned individuals. Vitamin D supplements are generally recommended.

# Medications for osteoporosis

**Bisphosphonates** are medications that slow the process of bone thinning. They are widely used for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis in various settings including steroid therapy. A number of preparations are available which differ in dosing frequency.

-   **Alendronate** (eg Fosamax) is taken ONCE A WEEK at a dose of 70mg.
-   **Risedronate** (Actonel) is also taken ONCE A WEEK at a dose of 35mg.
	-   Both Fosamax and Actonel also come in combination preparations which provide daily calcium and Vitamin D supplements with a weekly dose of bisphosphonate. Some people experience indigestion or reflux with these medications, and it is important to follow instructions about remaining upright and avoiding eating for 30 minutes after each dose.
-   **Zoledronic Acid** (Aclasta) is given as a once-yearly intravenous dose. Side effects can include flu-like symptoms for 24-72 hours, particularly with the first dose. It represents an alternative for those who cannot tolerate oral bisphosphonates. Treatment requires referral to a specialist Endocrinology unit.

All of the above medications can rarely cause jaw bone complications known as osteonecrosis. Your doctor may advise you to see a dentist prior to starting these medications and maintain good dental hygiene throughout.

## Other medications

A number of other medications are available for the treatment of osteoporosis. These are usually indicated in patients with severe osteoporosis or those who are unable to take bisphosphonates. Consideration of these medications is undertaken in consultation with a specialist Endocrinologist.

# Preventing falls

Experiencing falls significantly increases the risk of osteoporotic fractures in older adults. Simple measures to prevent falls can decrease the risk of fractures and this should be undertaken in consultation with your GP or other health professional.